it was April last year and I was on an
evening out with friends to celebrate
one of their birthdays we hadn't been
all together for a couple of weeks there
was a perfect evening as we were over
United at the end of the evening I
caught the last underground train back
to the other side of London the journey
was smooth I got back to my local
station and I began the 10-minute walk
home as I turned the corner onto my
streets my house and site up ahead I
heard footsteps behind me that seemed to
have approached out of nowhere and we're
picking up pace before I had time to
process what was happening a ham was
clapped around my mouth so that I could
not breathe and the young man behind me
dragged me to the ground beat my head
repeatedly against the pavement until my
face began to bleed kicking me in the
back and neck while he began to assault
me ripping off my clothes and telling me
to shut up
as I struggled to cry for help with each
smack of my head to the concrete ground
a question echo through my mind that
still haunts me today is this gonna be
how it all ends
little could I've realized I'd been
followed the whole way from the moment
that I left the station an hours later I
was standing topless and bare legs in
front of the police
having the cuts and bruises on my naked
body photographed for forensic evidence
now there are a few words to describe
the all-consuming feelings of
vulnerability shame upset and injustice
that I was ridden with in that moment
and for the weeks to come but wanting to
find a way to condense these feelings
into something ordered that I could work
through I decided to do what felt most
natural to me I wrote about it started
out as a cathartic exercise I wrote a
letter to my assaulter humanizing him as
you to identify him as part of the very
community that he had so violently
abused that night stressing the tidal
wave effect of his actions
I wrote did you ever think of the people
in your life I don't know who the people
in your life are I don't know anything
about you but do you know this you did
not just attack me that
I'm a daughter I'm a friend I'm a sister
I'm a people I'm a cousin I'm a niece
I'm a neighbor
I'm the employee who served everyone
coffee in the cafe under the railway and
all the people who form these relations
to me make up my community and you
assaulted every single one of them you
violated the truth that I will never
cease to fight for which all of these
people represent but there are
infinitely more good people in the world
than bad but determine not to let this
one incident make me lose faith in the
Solidarity of my community or humanity
as a whole I record the 77 terrorist
bombings in July 2005 on London
Transport and how the Mayor of London at
the time and indeed my own parents
insisted that we all get back on the
tubes the next day so that we wouldn't
be defined or changed by those who have
made us feel unsafe I told my attacker
you've carried out your attack but now
I'm getting back on my tube my community
will not feel we're unsafe walking home
after dark we will get on the last tubes
home and we will walk up our streets
alone because we will not ingrain or
submit to the idea that we are putting
ourselves in danger in doing so we will
continue to come together like an army
when any member of our community is
threatened and this is a fight you will
not win at the time of writing this
letter
at the time of writing this letter I was
studying for my exams in Oxford and I
was working on the local student paper
there and despite being lucky enough to
have friends and family supporting me
was pretty isolating time I didn't know
anyone who'd been through something like
this before at least I didn't think I
did I'd read the news reports the
statistics and I knew how common sexual
assault was yeah I couldn't actually
name a single person that I'd heard
speak out about an experience of this
kind before so in a somewhat spontaneous
decision I decided that I would publish
my letter in the student paper hoping to
reach out to others in Oxford that might
have had a similar experience and be
feeling the same way the end of the
letter
I asked others to write in with their
experiences under the hashtag not guilty
to emphasize that survivors of assault
could express themselves without feeling
shame or guilt about what happened to
them to show that we could all stand up
to sexual assault what I never
anticipated is that almost overnight
this published letter would go viral
soon we were receiving hundreds of
stories from men and women across the
world which we began to publish on a
website I set up and the hashtag became
a campaign there was an Australian
mother in her 40s who described how on
an evening out she was followed to the
bathroom by a man who went to repeatedly
grab her crotch I was a man in the
Netherlands who described how he was
date raped on a visit to London that
wasn't taken seriously by anyone he
reported his case too I had personal
Facebook messages from people in India
and South America saying how can we
bring a message of the campaign over
there one of the first contributions we
had was from a woman called Nikki who
described growing up being molested by
her own father and I had friends open up
to me about experiences ranging from
those that happen last week to those
that happen years ago that I'd had no
idea about and the more that we started
to receive these messages that all more
we also started to receive messages of
hope people feeling empowered by this
community of voices standing up to
sexual assault and victim blaming one
moment called Olivia after describing
how she was attacked by someone she had
trusted and cared about for a long time
said I've read many of the stories
posted on here and I feel more hopeful
that if so many women can move forward
then I can too have been inspired by
many and I hope I can be as strong as
them someday and I'm sure I will people
around the world began tweeting under
this hashtag and the letter was
republished and covered by the national
press as well as being translated in
several other languages worldwide but
something struck me about the media
attention that this letter was
attracting for something to be front
page news giving the word news itself we
can assume it must be something new or
something surprising
and yet sexual assault is not something
new sexual assaults along with other
kinds of in justices is reported in the
media all the time but through the
campaign these and justices were framed
is not just news stories they were
first-hand experiences that had affected
real people who were creating with the
Solidarity of others what they needed
and had previously lacked a platform to
speak out the reassurance they weren't
alone or to blame for what happened to
them and open discussions it would help
to reduce stigma around the issue the
voices of those directly affected were
at the forefront of the story not the
voices of journalists or commentators on
social media and that's why this story
was news we live in an incredibly
interconnected world with a
proliferation of social media which is
of course a fantastic resource for
igniting social change but it's also
made us increasingly reactive from the
smallest annoyances of all my trains
being delayed to the greatest in
justices of war genocides
terrorist attacks our default response
has become to leap to react to any kind
of grievance by tweeting facebooking
hash tagging anything to show others
that we too have reacted the problem
with reacting in this manner on mass is
it can sometimes mean that we don't
actually react at all but in the sense
that you're doing anything anyway
it might make ourselves feel better
feeling like we've contributed to a
group mourning or outrage it doesn't
actually change anything and what's more
it can sometimes drown out the voices of
those directly affected by the injustice
whose needs must be heard whirring - is
the de tendency for some reactive
responses to injustice to build even
more walls being quick to point fingers
with the hope of providing easy
solutions to complex problems one
British tabloid on the publication of my
letter branded a headline stating Oxford
student launches online campaign to
shame attacker but the campaign never
meant to shame anyone it meant to let
people speak and to make others listen
divisive Twitter trolls were quick to
create even more injustice
commenting on my attackers ethnicity or
class to push their own prejudice
agendas and some even accused me of
feigning the whole thing to push and I
quote my feminist agenda of man-hating I
know right as if I'm gonna be like hey
guys sorry I can't make it I'm really
busy trying to hate the entire male
population by the time I'm 30 now I'm
almost sure that these people wouldn't
say the things they say in person but
it's just because they might be behind a
screen in the comfort of their own home
when on social media that people forget
that what they're doing is a public act
that other people will be reading it and
be affected by it we're returning to my
analogy of getting back on our trains
another main concern that I have about
this noise that escalates from our
online responses to injustice is that it
can very easily slip into portraying us
as the affected party which can lead to
a sense of defeatism a kind of mental
barrier to seeing any opportunity for
positivity or change after a negative
situation couple of months before the
campaign started or any of this happened
to me I went to a TEDx event in Oxford
and I saw Zelda a hansi speak the former
private secretary to Nelson Mandela one
of the stories she told her he struck me
she spoke of when Mandela was taken to
court by the South African rugby union
after he commissioned an inquiry into
sports Affairs in the courtroom he went
up to the South kin rugby union's
lawyers shook them by the hand and
conversed with him each in their own
language and Zelda wanted a protest
saying you know they had no right to his
respect after this injustice that they
had caused him he turned to her and said
you must never allow the enemy to
determine the grounds for battle at time
of hearing these words I didn't really
know why they were so important but I
felt though they were and I wrote them
down in a notebook that I had made on me
at the time but I thought about this
line a lot ever since revenge or the
expression of hatred towards those who
have done us injustice may feel like a
human instinct in the face of wrong we
need to break out of these cycles if we
are to hope to transform negative events
of injustice into positive social change
to do otherwise continues to let the
enemy determine the grounds for battle
creates a binary where
we who have suffered become the affected
pitted against them the perpetrators and
just like we got back on our tubes we
come on let our platforms for
interconnectivity and community with the
places that we settle for defeat but now
I don't want to discourage a social
media response because I owe the
development of the not-guilty campaign
almost entirely to social media I do
want to encourage a more considered
approach to the way we use it to respond
to injustice and I start I think is to
ask ourselves two things firstly why do
I feel this injustice in my case there
were several answers to this someone had
hurt me and those who I loved under the
assumption that they wouldn't have to be
held to account or recognize the damage
they're caused not only that but
thousands of men and women suffer every
day from sexual abuse often in silence
and yet it's still a problem that we
don't give the same airtime to as other
issues still an issue many people blame
victims for so next ask yourself how in
recognizing these reasons could I go
about reversing them with us this was
holding my attacker to account and many
others was calling them out on the
effect that they had caused it was
giving airtime to the issue of sexual
assault
opening up discussions amongst friends
much families in the media that have
been closed for too long and stressing
the victims shouldn't feel to blame for
what happened to them we might still
have a long way to go in solving this
problem entirely but in this way we can
begin to use social media as an active
tool for social justice this is tool to
educate to stimulate dialogues to make
those in positions of authority aware of
an issue by listening to those directly
affected by it because sometimes these
questions don't have easy answers in
fact they rarely do but this doesn't
mean we still can't give them a
considered response in situations where
you can't go about thinking how you'd
reverse this feeling of injustice you
can still think maybe not what you can
do but what you can not do you can not
build further walls by fighting
injustice with more prejudice more
hatred you can not speak over those
directly affected by an injustice and
you can not react to injustice only to
forget about it the next day just
because the rest of Twitter has moved on
sometimes not reacting instantly is
ironically the best immediate course of
action we can take
because we might be angry upset and
energized by injustice but let's
consider our responses let us hold
people to account without descending
into a culture that thrives off shaming
and injustice ourselves let us remember
that distinction so often forgotten but
by Internet users between criticism and
insult let us not forget to think before
we speak just because we might have a
screen in front of us when we create
noise on social media then it not drown
out the needs of those affected but
instead let it amplify their voices so
the Internet becomes a place where
you're not the exception if you speak
out about something that has actually
happened to you all these considered
approaches to injustice evoke the very
key stones upon which the internet was
built to network to have signaled
connect all these terms that imply
bringing people together not pushing
people apart because if you look up the
word justice in the dictionary before
punishment before administration of law
or judicial authority you get the
maintenance of what is right I think
there are a few things more right in
this world than bringing people together
than unions and if we allow social media
to deliver that then it can deliver a
very powerful form of justice indeed
thank you very much
[Applause]
[Music]